Dear all, today
is probably the last outing in
the form of lay people for everyone
here. The purpose of this trip
is the final exercise, the final purification,
not a pointless outing. Dear
all,
a person who walks the path of
renunciation and seeking
enlightenment must be
someone with clear thinking,
wise choices,
ideals, and unwavering resolve.
For those who choose the path of
renunciation, especially those practicing the Dharma,
we must be certain that within
our hearts
there is a firm belief,
that is, belief in ourselves,
belief in ourselves. Somewhere in
our hearts,
there is a love for
chastity, a love for chastity.
If,
before renouncing the world, they cannot overcome a certain
thought or they cannot
recognize in their hearts that they love
chastity, then when they enter the path of renunciation,
they must suddenly understand the
value of chastity.
The path of renunciation is the path of gradually
abandoning all worldly desires and pleasures.  To
renounce worldly desires,
one must thoroughly understand
the
dangers of these desires. The Buddha taught that one
must see both the sweetness of
desires and their dangers.
Desire, while sweet,
causes people
to forget
themselves because
it leads them outwardly,
seeking everything outside of themselves. However, the
outside world is impermanent, causing suffering. Therefore, an
outwardly focused mind
leads to suffering; no one with an
outwardly focused mind can find happiness. Those who aspire to become monks or
nuns must
understand the dangers and
suffering of desires.
No
one in this world feels content
with what they
have. Why do they always feel
dissatisfied?
Because every outwardly focused person
carries within them a source of envy.  Envy and
rivalry are
immense, and as long as we harbor
envy and rivalry in our hearts,
we will never feel satisfied. Desires
make us feel content;
that is the sweetness, but
also the
danger. We enjoy desires, we
feel comfortable and at ease—that is the
sweetness. But the
more we have, the greater our greed and malice become,
and it burns us—that
is the danger of desires. They lead
people to the peak of
conflict. We
can also contemplate this, like
sitting on a throne. Is a throne
ever safe? It's
not stable; a throne is always imperfect.
The higher you are, the more imperfect it becomes. Why does a
king worry about external enemies,
and his
courtiers always want to usurp the throne? What does a
king enjoy in life? He has
360 concubines and beautiful women—but are there any
loyal ones? They are always just
fighting and scheming.  To seize the throne, is
n't it true that among the king's sons,
one's own son poses a danger to oneself
because they also compete and fight for the
throne? Therefore, to walk
this path, one must possess
wisdom and insight, observing the truth of the
world, the sweetness of the world, and the
dangers of the world. Only then can one walk
this path.
So, when one
has relinquished the physical form of a layperson,
one must have seen this, and
no longer see the
world as happiness or desire. Only then can one
walk
this path. During the time of the Buddha,
many princes and noblemen became monks. Why were they able to renounce worldly life? Because
they deeply understood the
time of the Buddha. In the time of the Buddha,
wealthy people and princes became monks
more often than the
poor. So here, let's trace back the causes and conditions. Those who
want to renounce worldly life
are those who have seen it as something
tiresome and disillusioning. If they are not tired of it,
then those who walk
this path, even if they are poor in this life, will be
very, very fortunate in the next.  Those who are very,
very successful in life,
in that lifetime,
also have a feeling of utter
weariness, don't they? They must have a feeling of
utter weariness of worldly fame and desires,
right? They may
have been kings or officials,
weary of the competition for women,
children, wealth, and
power. It's not by chance that in
this lifetime we love the path of the
Pure Land; it all has its cause.
For example, some people are very
strong in this lifetime, perhaps in a
previous life they knew and continued this path
early. Others may have felt
weariness in a previous life, but in
this life they haven't had the opportunity to continue this path, so their
minds are still attached to worldly things. No
one can
remain on the path of the Pure Land without having experienced weariness of worldly life. That's
impossible. Because when we become
monks or nuns, we begin to see life with
the eyes of
enlightenment. Looking at two people in love, they know the
suffering that will come to them, they
know the afflictions that bind them, and they
bind them.  When
we begin to attain enlightenment,
we begin to see life through the eyes of
enlightenment. We see all the desires of worldly people.
For example,
happiness—they see the
impermanence and suffering behind it. They see the worldly scene of people being
happy and joyful together,
but they also know that behind this
happiness, this joy,
this excitement lies
suffering. Therefore, why do those who have renounced the world
maintain their path? They
always
use wisdom
to see the world, to see the truth of
life. Whoever firmly walks this path will
often see the truth
of life, the truth of human existence:
nothing is permanent, nothing
is truly
happy.
People see happiness, they see
joy, they are overwhelmed because
one main reason is that they do not
recognize the truth of things, they do not
recognize the truth of things. That's why they are
happy, they don't see impermanence, they don't see the
bondage, they don't see the burning.
Here, the mind is focused on contemplation. For
example, one thought arises: the
desire for fame.  If
we don't awaken to
this thought, we are bound by it. What does it
mean to be bound? It means we are constantly being
controlled by it, isn't it? We try every
way to serve that thought. That means
everything we do is to serve
that thought.
We become slaves to that thought,
so it binds and controls us, is
n't it? That thought of seeking fame binds
us, controls us, and causes us
so much trouble and suffering. We cannot
escape from this thought. From
this thought arises an
object, doesn't it?
For example, this pursuit of fame needs to go through
certain objects, and we have to face the
schemes of those objects. So, aren't
we bound and controlled? No, we are
bound and
controlled. Therefore, for those who have renounced the
world, we begin to see things
differently from ordinary people. Ordinary people
cannot see this, but
those who have renounced the world must see it.
That is, we begin to see the truth, the
real truth. Before we
walked this path, we couldn't
see the truth.  Is that really true? In life,
there's a saying, "Looking at things, you think they're one way, but they're not."
People are
like that. For example, two people
are in love,
and they think the other person will bring
them happiness for life,
right? They look,
interact, and feel that way,
but it's not. That
means everything is like that; they
think everything is forever, everything is
permanent, everything will bring happiness,
but nothing is like that.
So today, we're going out,
everyone's having fun, but we should also try to
look at things with a different perspective.
We're all sitting here, enjoying ourselves for a bit, then we get
up and the fun is gone. Right? We
eat something, it tastes good, then it's gone, we
think this deliciousness brings
us happiness, but then it's gone. A little later,
someone might
criticize us, and we're miserable again, right?
So we think, "Today I
ate something so delicious, I'm so happy," but it's not like that.
At the table, just looking at each other with
different eyes can ruin the fun and the taste.
At the table, if there's a hint
of scheming, then how can there be any joy left
in life?  It's impossible not to have
those things, isn't it? Friends are
also envious and jealous of each other because of wealth
and beauty, aren't they? There are so
many things. Therefore, on this path,
we must always contemplate and
reflect to see the truth. Seeing the
truth is called wisdom, and
then we become bored. Actually,
we call it attaining the truth. Attaining the truth is
called attaining the
Dharma. So today, the
congregation is going on a tour of Ha Long Bay, the
last trip to enjoy the Dharma
in this lay person's body. But
surely everyone will see that their state of mind is
different from before, isn't it?
Very different from before. And
later, when we leave the monastic life,
our contemplation will be even greater.
We must contemplate everything we see.
For those who have renounced the world,
mindfulness is like that—mindfulness of
suffering, mindfulness of sharing. That is mindfulness of suffering.
Constantly contemplating suffering leads to enlightenment. Enlightenment
leads to liberation.
We must understand the Buddha's
teachings on this world.  This life is full of suffering,
without a single joy. What joy is there?
That question must be deciphered by oneself, by oneself, through
self-reflection and contemplation.
Therefore, for lay
practitioners who are practicing and preparing to become monks, later
on, the practice of mindfulness and contemplation will organize
many classes.
The purpose is enlightenment and
purification. We will eliminate those who lack the necessary
qualities. Those who lack the
qualities of a wise person must be
eliminated. Those who do not want to enter monastic
life and then leave will have
low intelligence, low virtue, no wisdom, no ideals,
right? Without wisdom,
without ideals, with
no
greedy desires, it's like having
eyes full of dust. Only with eyes less dust can one walk
this path. Many
people who
enter monastic life but do not
practice pure conduct are very numerous, aren't they?
But
we must be different. We must practice pure conduct,
cherish pure conduct, and
see the value of pure
conduct. Pure conduct leads us
easily. Eliminating desires makes enlightenment easier, is
n't it? It's easy to attain enlightenment.  Therefore,
virtuous conduct is what we must strive for. Only by cultivating virtuous conduct can
we attain enlightenment and
realize the truth of
life. The more virtuous
we are, the higher our level of happiness, the more peaceful our minds become,
and the more we understand the true
value of virtuous conduct.
The Buddha taught that this path is the
path against the cycle of birth and death. The cycle of birth and death is filled with
greed and desire; the more intense the desire, the greater the suffering. The higher the level of suffering, the
darker the mind becomes.
From morning till night, we think of
nothing
but seeking food and sustenance for
this body. We cannot see the truth of
life, the truth of
phenomena, or our own inner selves. We cannot see our
inner selves, we cannot
see anything at all. Therefore, when
we walk this path, having
vowed to walk this path,
we must
always elevate ourselves, elevate ourselves,
lead ourselves to virtuous conduct, lead
ourselves to enlightenment, lead ourselves to liberation. A
wise person must succeed in
whatever they choose in life;
to succeed, one must
strive and pursue their ideals. Similarly, in the path of enlightenment, one must strive to
achieve success.  To practice, one must
strive to pursue one's ideals,
renouncing
possessions. We live only with the mind, the mind of
liberation, the wisdom of liberation, eliminating desires.
Therefore,
why do some people reach their destination on this path while
others do not?
Because we do not
think deeply, and
we do not
set our minds in the right direction. We
must set our minds towards
virtuous conduct, towards the cessation of desires, and then we will
succeed.
The five things—wealth, beauty, fame, food, and water—those
are the five enemies we must eliminate.
I hope today is a pleasant
outing,
and this is also an opportunity for
us to contemplate, to
reflect on our inner selves when
interacting with the world. That's how a practitioner should be, is
n't it? A practitioner must be like that. So, when
in the monastery, when eating, we must
contemplate that food only nourishes the body.
Whether it tastes good or not, we must not be greedy. Therefore,
we
must contemplate to eradicate the greedy mind. When
greed is eradicated, then attachment will cease.  If greed
cannot be eradicated, then love cannot be eradicated. The
worldly scenery is impermanent. Everything
in this world is
man-made, meaning created by humans
from their greedy minds. It is also created by nature, from the
karma of sentient beings. There is
nothing strange or unusual about it. Isn't that right?
People in this world,
when they see beautiful scenery, are delighted. If it's not
man-made, then what is it? It's just the
imagination and desires of
human beings that create it. Isn't that right? When
the mind is free from desire,
those scenes are no longer beautiful. All beautiful scenes that
we call man-made are
created by human karma. The entire
universe is created by the mind, is
n't that right? Therefore, we must constantly contemplate. As
monastic disciples, we must
constantly
contemplate that we face the world just
like worldly people,
but our state of mind must be
different. We are not greedy, we are not attached to
worldly pleasures, we are not bound by them. That is, we do not give rise to
unwholesome thoughts of desire and
possession. When our greed
arises, we are  We begin to be
bound by it, we are controlled by it, we
become slaves, suffering greatly, and only the
Buddha can point this out to us.
Only the Buddha can make us
recognize this. We are bound,
we are controlled, we are
enslaved without knowing it
until we attain enlightenment. Only then do we
know this. Is it true
that we ourselves can be
beings who are not enslaved, not bound by
anything, not controlled by
anything. We are completely free,
liberated from anything, from the bondage,
from the slavery of our own greedy thoughts.
Our task is simply to escape, to break free
from the binding, the control
that we have been bound by for so long, for
so many lifetimes. Isn't that right?
We are always bound by it, we are controlled by it without ever
realizing it. Isn't that right? In
this lifetime, we must recognize it and
we must escape it. It's not about
escaping from anyone else, but from that
thing itself.  The mind and the duty
of a monastic must always be to
see that whatever thought
binds us, we must immediately release it. We must
not accept it binding us; we must
conquer it, not let it bind
us. The mind's contemplation should also be constant,
not allowing anything to bind us or
mislead us. We must have
ideals,
right? For
individuals, we must release ourselves from greed and desire. For the
Bodhi mind, we must release ourselves from
cowardice, fear, and laziness in order to transmit the
Buddha's teachings.
Therefore, why are these minds
great? Because few people in the world can do this,
right? Very, very few
people can do this. Therefore, we
do not identify with unawakened beings.
We also do not identify with
those who may have become monastics but are
not yet enlightened. We must enlighten the masses.
Right? Giving up a lifetime,
giving up a human life, giving up a karmic connection, what do we gain?
Therefore, we, as monastics, must be
true to
what is right, true to being a monastic with a
noble ideal.
That is, we must be
strong and we must support each other.
This is necessary.  Let's not hold each other back.
Not a single day before going to sleep should
we accept any thought that
is binding us. Only then can
we go to sleep in liberation, right? Not being bound by
any thought.
We may not yet be
diligent in that thought, but we gradually overcome it, not with
thoughts of fame, desires, or
greed. Right? Because
we have already
created this body through karma, so we
are being controlled by it.
We gradually overcome it because of sleep. Sleeping takes a
long time, right?
Because sitting in meditation causes pain,
leg pain, back pain—we
gradually overcome that. Do you understand this point? For example,
this meditation session lasts 30 minutes, but 20 minutes of rest is
also fine.
Gradually, we will understand this. If
we persevere, and let go of other desires, then that desire will gradually disappear. Do
you understand this point? If we let go of
this, and this diligence arises,
then that diligence will follow.
No one is born spontaneously;
no one emerges on their own. And the slumber is long, but
gradually it will lessen, meaning the Dharma
will gradually be achieved. But the ideal must
never be interrupted, the path must
never be obscured. We
must clearly understand the path so that our minds are
not affected, so that we are not overwhelmed by this world.
We are monks, we
go to the rich,
we go there without contemplation, and we will see
ourselves as inferior, we will see ourselves as being desired, we
will find pleasure in what others have, we will see
what others have as
superior and good, we will see others as great.
That is wrong.
We are walking on the path of seeing suffering,
while others are entering into suffering. We are
abandoning suffering, while others
are searching for it. These are two
different extremes; there is nothing to compare
them. To make this clear,
those who practice asceticism must always see
their own purity, their true nature, their true
reality. Otherwise, what will we gain
from purity? What will we gain from impurity?
We will be inferior, won't
we?  We are giving up, and we have been giving up
for many lifetimes, not just now.
We must have had the karmic connection to give up, and only
now are we sitting here.
We must be kings, when we are kings, when
we are heavenly kings, we must have
accumulated the thought of seeing suffering, only then do
we have the karmic connection to sit in this
ascetic assembly. Remember
that. It is the accumulation of each and every thought of
our enlightenment from many lifetimes,
from the time we were old men,
we saw suffering, felt bored,
felt stuck, had no way out, wanted to seek
a path to peace. When
we were ordinary people, we were also
bored, also stuck, had no way out,
right? We also wished for a
path. Although life is suffering, what
joy is there? We must have accumulated a
lot of merit from many lifetimes until
now to have the karmic connection to be
in this assembly. It's not just a matter of
saying, "In the first life, I
met someone and I became enlightened." That's not how it happens; without the karmic connection, it would happen so
quickly.
It must have been accumulated from...  For many lifetimes,
we have become weary of this world, so that the
masses may recognize
ourselves and understand why we chose
this path. We must see the truth: for
many lifetimes, we have become weary of
that other path. Do you understand? Therefore,
when we face life and
see people who are officials,
we still interact with them and respect them
because they are fortunate enough to become officials.
But if we turn inward, we are
abandoning that worldly fortune, aren't we?
That fortune...  Even if I wanted to be a king of heaven, I'm still giving
up on that, not seeking
that blessing.
Therefore, I never feel
inferior to the masses. Do you understand this? You
never see a time when other
people's ideals in this world are as high as
yours. It can't be like that because
they are what they are hoping for, while we are what we
are giving up. Between someone who is
hoping and someone who is giving up, who is higher? The one who
is giving up must be higher. For example, I've eaten this food to my heart's content, while someone else is craving it but hasn't had the chance yet. That's different, isn't it? They are two different extremes. Therefore, we must always correctly identify ourselves. Do you
understand this? Sometimes, when
we don't correctly identify ourselves, meaning we don't
know who we are and
where we are, what will happen?
We will be confused, we will be disoriented, we will be
indecisive, right? So, the masses
must correctly identify themselves,
their circumstances, their position. Do
you understand? You must correctly identify
your circumstances, your position,
your path, and...  Our continued pursuit
is to reach a very high and good place, is
n't it? Like everyone else, we
want to reach something, we aspire to be the ruler
of this world, for example, right? Even the
highest-ranking person wants to
rule this world, but we want to
leave this world. It's
different; we want to leave it,
not to rule it, because being the
ruler isn't satisfying. The more we strive, the more
suffering, the more烦恼 (troubles), the more entanglements, the more we
're consumed. Isn't that right? It's
very painful. We think we've achieved something,
but it turns out we haven't achieved anything, right? Nothing at all, nothing at all.
So, ambitious
people usually have to consider what they've gained in this world,
how much they've strived, and
what they've gained—nothing at all, only more trouble. Is
n't that right? The more trouble they get, the more trouble they experience.
What they haven't achieved, they
desire to achieve. Once they achieve it, they
feel more trouble, more suffering.
So here, Tâm Chí Quán shares this with the general
public so that
we can recognize and understand
ourselves clearly.  Because walking this path is the
path of self-knowledge, so that we can clearly understand
ourselves and be
steadfast in our own ideals. That's
why we monks see
that we want to sing and dance a lot,
but they remain normal. They have their own
perspective. Do you understand this?
They have their own perspective. It's like a fly
flying around a
pile of food it likes, but when we
humans see it, we
find it unpleasant. We don't like what we eat. It's
like not seeing it, not liking it,
not finding it suitable for ourselves. It's the same for
practitioners. They see suffering,
so they don't like that suffering food.
If a past thought comes back and causes a
feeling in the mind, they
must turn back and focus on what they are doing. That's what
practitioners do. Therefore,
practitioners are
very precious and
admirable. The path they take is unknown to the world;
they have the karmic affinity to follow.  Life is
not about chance, so
this path is not noble, so
we must see it as precious, see the path
as precious. Do you all understand this point? Never, never
let yourself let go. If you do
n't think, when you have a single thought, you
see that people are like that, then you must
immediately detach yourself. Do you understand this point?
Therefore, we are never tainted. So, I
say, the mind of mindfulness is in all
situations, never being tainted by a single thought.
It's all just a means,
never craving these
things, whether it's laughter or joy. Outwardly it may seem that way,
but inwardly it is constant enlightenment. Do you all
understand this point? Constant
enlightenment never gets tainted,
never gets engrossed, never chooses,
never likes that thing.
That is merely a means to
guide everyone. We know it
clearly,
not just know it clearly, but in
reality, we deeply understand that
point, not just seeing it to
know
it. Because we understand the suffering, that's why we
want everyone to go there.
No, and we're
almost at the shore, aren't we? I hope everyone
will reach the shore as well.
I wish
us all complete success on
our path. This path is a long one,
perhaps a lifetime's journey, until the moment we
close our eyes and attain enlightenment, right? That's
very precious. But for one of us, if we
maintain this ideal,
this ideal, we will
quickly reach enlightenment. Never let this thought be
interrupted, because this thought
is the very thought leading to enlightenment. Do you all
understand this point? If we
think like this every day, we are sure to reach
enlightenment. We must
understand, we must understand that to reach
enlightenment, we must enter the path of enlightenment. To enter the
path of enlightenment, the mind must not be interrupted. Do
you all understand this point? If it is not
interrupted, we will enter and
reach enlightenment, we will reach sainthood.
We must understand the path
itself. If our mind sometimes enters and sometimes leaves, clinging to
worldly desires, how can we
reach enlightenment? Enlightenment means our eyes are
directed towards this, isn't that right? Enlightenment
is the fruit of the mind.  If we just focus our minds, we
will achieve enlightenment. If we practice,
people know, "I'm going to practice, but I
don't know how to succeed." Success or
failure depends on each of your thoughts, right? If
your thoughts are directed towards
liberation, then you will achieve enlightenment.
Our minds only need to be ideals. Even if we
die, we will not leave this path. Even if we die, we
must not abandon the Dharma. The ascetic community understands, right? Even if we
die, we must not abandon the Dharma. We
abandon the Brahma-vihara path, not with anything. We abandon
this path, we abandon it. There are so many things, that's why
the Buddha taught that where there is Dharma, there is
sustenance, even if you drive us away, we will not leave. Because of
our karmic connections. So if the teacher teaches us, we
feel like the teacher is driving us away, and
our friends and brothers feel hurt towards our brothers,
right? Then the celestial demons possess our minds,
making us want to leave. That's why the
Buddha taught that wherever there is Dharma, there is sustenance,
even if you drive us away, we will not leave. So each
person, when they become a monk, must vow
to die in this assembly, in
this temple, so that everyone understands. Even if you drive us away, we will
not leave. To die is to die within the Dharma,
within the Dharma.  This Dharma never
abandons us. We must be
steadfast like this to hope to
attain enlightenment. If our minds are
unsteady, sometimes happy, we practice; if not, we don't.
How can we overcome
our karmic forces? Our karmic forces
manifest in many ways,
causing us to have
wavering thoughts. Do you understand this? That's
why the Buddha taught that when we have the Dharma,
we must contemplate: "There is Dharma,
isn't there food? There is food, there is
Dharma, and there is food, meaning we won't
starve, right? And when there is Dharma, when
there is Dharma and food, even
beating or chasing won't get us away. Only then
can we maintain our minds focused
on enlightenment. Otherwise, we wo
n't be able to resolve it.
This is a very important lesson
for
us on this path of cultivation. Just
like our Buddha, even in his
final moments sitting under the Bodhi tree, demons
still came, clinging to his mind and trying to drive him away."
You see, but he said
he's tired of all that. Even if a
demon comes to attack, he's tired, and even if he uses lust, he's
tired, right? Using fame, using
women, using power to fight won't
work. So we must learn from the
Buddha. Do you understand? Even if you're
driven away,
you must not abandon the community, you must not abandon this community practicing the Dharma of
Brahma-Hana. Do you understand this point?
That's why the Buddha taught that the ascetic practice
leads to enlightenment. But it must be
for those who persevere to the end.
When we encounter obstacles, there are so
many of them. We think, "Oh,
here, brothers and sisters, it's not allowed," "Oh, here, teacher, it's
not allowed," "There are all sorts of things that are not allowed," "
People have the Dharma already." There's nothing that is
not allowed. Do you understand this point?
This life still has many
beautiful women leading each other down the path of
suffering. At that time, we think they are walking
on the path of happiness, we think
we've taken the wrong path, we're walking on the path of
loneliness, and that's it, right? You
have to see
them, you have to see the
suffering that is controlling and binding them.
And are you about to lead people astray? It's so, so
painful. The Buddha taught that all
phenomena are created by the mind. We
see how quickly the human mind changes its mood, how
quickly the weather changes its mood. All phenomena are
created by the mind, aren't they? Then it changes its mood very quickly. You're sitting in the sea, and a tsunami comes to Laos, you don't know anything, you can't run fast enough. All these phenomena are
created by the mind. As long as we are still controlled by the mind,
we are still controlled by
this realm. To escape the mind is to escape
this realm of suffering. You're sitting there, you're
driving a car, and you collide with
something, right? Everything is
impermanent, changing its mood very
quickly, so, so painful. Therefore,
we must see that we are
among the very
rare beings, fortunate to be able to walk on
this path. To see countless creatures, how
many are there? It's terrifying, countless birds,
countless crickets,
countless toads, countless frogs. And
how many truly practice? Isn't that rare? Very rare,
so we are rarer, rarer than the king of heaven. That's what we
like, isn't it?  This is
no joke! So, we really
have to see that our mindset
is a precious mindset that has only just
sprouted from countless eons, right? From countless eons, it's been sprouting, and
now it's just sprouting a little bit.
We have to nurture it, understand? Let it become a great
Bodhi tree, not let
it wither and die,
letting weeds and rubbish grow.
What can we say then? We must let
this mindset become a Bodhi tree, so that it can
shade us and all sentient beings. Isn't that right? That's
why we must strive for one lifetime so that we can continue our journey for many lifetimes. Isn't that right? Only by
cultivating ourselves can
we truly develop the
Bodhi Mind. To put it this way,
Bodhisattvas have not yet attained liberation. If they haven't attained
liberation, they will be like
sentient beings, still trapped in the cycle of suffering.
Bodhisattvas walk on their own path,
their own steadfast path. If their minds are filled with
greed and desire, how can they walk? Isn't it true that without greed and
desire...  If you're going to die from being immersed in worldly desires,
then you must enter a state of liberation
before you can cultivate the Bodhisattva Mind, my dear friends.
Without liberation, you can't
accomplish anything.
Without liberation, you'll be
controlled by fame, fortune, and wealth in every lifetime.
On the map of the Dharma realm, the
Bodhisattva realm is the first to reach the Buddha realm. That's the Bodhisattva realm, then the Buddha
realm, the realm of perfect enlightenment.
Therefore, in
this lifetime, you must cultivate. Let's use the term "
must delve into your own mind," which is called practicing the Hinayana.
For example, let's use the term "must cultivate
until you attain enlightenment." Once you attain enlightenment, use that Bodhi Mind,
and from the next lifetime onwards, you can
practice the Bodhisattva path to seek Supreme Enlightenment, my dear friends.
If
we don't think in this lifetime that "I have
n't attained liberation yet, but I can practice the
Bodhisattva path," then practicing the Bodhisattva path will lead to
immediate immersion. If you're not liberated, what
else could you be immersed in? And when practicing the Bodhisattva path,
everything is just the initial cause,
like our Bodhisattva Siddhartha.
He was born into a royal family, enjoying
a life of full sensual pleasures, and
then married Yasodhara. He enjoyed a
life of full sensual pleasures, but how could
he depart without mindfulness? Do
you see that?
Without mindfulness, how could he depart? If he didn't have
mindfulness and saw that sick old man, he
might have ordered his soldiers to chase him away, would
n't he? Because of greed and anger. That's
why we must steadfastly cultivate in
this lifetime to prepare for many
future lifetimes to practice the Bodhisattva path. The assembly understands this point: if we are
not steadfast, we will only be able to practice the
Bodhisattva path in future lives. If
we do not have a liberated mind, a liberated wisdom, then we
cannot practice the Bodhisattva path. Therefore,
we must attain liberation before we can
practice the Bodhisattva path.
People have the concept that an
Arhat is an Arhat, while those with a contemplative mind
have the concept that after becoming an Arhat, one must
first develop the Bodhisattva aspiration. You have attained liberation,
but
where are the skillful means? An Arhat is...  There is no
skillful means yet; only the mind has been freed from desire. If one doesn't possess skillful
means, one
must enter the world and practice the
Bodhisattva path. Only then can one
acquire skillful means. And
when one attains Buddhahood,
one must complete the skillful means to
become a fully enlightened Buddha.
Therefore, in terms of liberation,
Buddhas and Arhats are equal,
but in terms of skillful means,
how can an Arhat be equal to a Buddha? It's
impossible. Therefore, to possess skillful means, one must practice the
Bodhisattva path. To practice the Bodhisattva path, one must be free from desire.
You only enter the world; you cannot be tainted by worldly desires, become engrossed in worldly things, or be led astray by worldly views. You will
never be
misled. People who attain Bodhisattvahood live in every lifetime, in every lifetime,
living by ideals. Do you see, Master, that
they are very mindful?
Without mindfulness, who would have such a life? Perhaps in
this lifetime, one would attain Bodhisattvahood, but at the end of
life, be deluded? That would be unacceptable. Do you all
understand this point?  Therefore, those who practice the Bodhisattva path
must already
have the mind for liberation; they
just need to enter the world. Let's take
this example: a
police officer, for instance, goes to catch criminals. To
catch a criminal, he must engage in the practice of "
attachment and connection." So, a
Bodhisattva who wants to save the world
must engage in the practice of "attachment and connection" with sentient
beings. It's not about not engaging in the
practice; it's about engaging in the practice. Through that interaction, one
understands. During
that interaction, there are still things one doesn't know, so one
stumbles and stumbles
a little,
right? That's why this
is what's called, or rather, the "
paramita of giving," right?
Therefore, even after attaining Arhatship, one
doesn't rest, except for
those who haven't
yet developed the Bodhi Mind. But if one has developed the Bodhi Mind, even after attaining Arhatship, one
doesn't rest. In the next life, one might
become a fisherman. A
Bodhisattva's path might take many lifetimes.  After that, he
became a king again, wasn't it because he practiced the
Bodhisattva path? That's right, we should think like
our Bodhisattva Tran Nhan Tong, who was
n't an ordinary person. How could he be an ordinary person? An ordinary person
only seeks to seize power and
end up with many wives and
children. Who would abandon gold and become an
ascetic on a mountain at
5:00 AM? It's
5:00 AM the day we left, and he still hadn't attained enlightenment? Isn't that right?
What king wouldn't be
enlightened and do that? It must be a
Bodhisattva, right? A Bodhisattva incarnate can do
that. The mind of the Bodhisattva says that our Venerable Tran Nhan
Tong was a great Bodhisattva. He
must have practiced the Bodhisattva path for many lifetimes to have
such skillful means and merit. To enlighten
the people of the whole country is no joke. Bringing
the people of the whole country into Buddhism and having
all the people use the Six Harmonies is
no ordinary matter. It takes many lifetimes,
many perfect virtues and paramitas, to
achieve such a feat.  That's why
he himself preserved the cradle of
Buddhism in Vietnam, which is why
later generations have reason to speak out, right?
No one can interfere
with the practice of many people, so it's
said that Bodhisattva Nhân Tông is a very
great Bodhisattva. We in Vietnam today
must have a connection with him, it's not
simple, right? So, the
paramitas are not
easy to uphold, preserving the paramitas and cultivating the
paramitas. So, to say he
didn't achieve liberation,
how could he have done that? Right? He couldn't have
done that. Therefore, we
are on this path, not a path
of rest, but a new beginning, a new beginning. Do you understand this
point?
Before, we were tossed about by waves, sometimes rising, sometimes
falling, not yet self-controlled. That's not what you
call "going to work," right? This lifetime is just
beginning, a new beginning, a new start. Do you understand this point?
Starting to work, starting to get started. Do you
understand? We haven't started all the karmic connections
on this path
yet. Three more kalpas, do you understand this strange point? It's
not...  It's lost somewhere, but in every
life we're born into, we're all doing great things, right? That means
knowing the path to follow, not being
led by anyone, knowing our own way.
We must clearly understand
what our work is. People
say these monks are idle and unemployed, but we
must realize they don't know
anything, they say that, right? They don't
understand, so we know this is the
beginning. We are going to do great good deeds. We understand this
clearly, right?
That's walking on the path of great good. We are walking on this path,
officially starting to do good deeds,
right? We are
just beginning to do good deeds, what does that mean? We
speak words that enlighten people.
Before, we only spoke words that caused
people suffering. Isn't that right?
Now, in this life, we are just starting to do good deeds, do you
see? We
start speaking words that
benefit people, that's what we call
starting to do good deeds. And this
work, today is the 18th day of the lunar month.
Applying for a job means applying for a job for three lifetimes, a
long period without unemployment,
so we understand this point, right? That's a very
long-term, stable job, okay? No lifetime will be spent in
confusion without a job, understand? There are
many jobs!
Our Buddha was like that; the scriptures have
clearly taught it. We just need to listen, learn, and
follow. Once again, we
officially reach
the shore of our
desire. We wish that in
three lifetimes, each of us will always have our own karmic connections,
but we will always support
each other, walking on this path
until the day we achieve perfect enlightenment.
Now, let's go to the
shore. These beautiful scenes
created by nature are called those created from the dreamy minds
of sentient beings, right? Dreamy minds
are what people like, and
beautiful scenes are often created from the
dreamy minds of sentient beings. So
when sentient beings see them, it's exactly like a dream
scene, a dream scene, isn't
it? People have merit, they are
good, they have merit, so
when their minds desire these scenes, they
make the world feel peaceful.  It
manifests itself, so these beautiful scenes
create a dreamy state of mind, living in
[music]
through the world
[Applause]
[music]
world B ship father linch son Manh
[music] established Green Green
connecting green green Clouds swirling
VH singing xèo high pass high high girl needing the emperor
Kim Dai near Vietnam
Christmas listening to the sound at Duong H
tunnel our ancestors Nga year green spring forest
building b ttin c h Hong Viet
[Applause]
Nam golden there g mark the nam Chau
Vietnamese people we extend our hands out bright sticky rice table
from pride is Vietnam Vietnamese people we Vietnamese people
push each other's hands against M pull in we stop
building the Hung Ca Vietnam n ch price phậ is
Vietnamo
is Vietnam from H is Vietnam
Vietnam from H is Vietnam from H is Vietnam Vietnam
[Applause]
[music]
temple
vi vi
from la is Vietnam from la is Vietnam
[music]
vi he he he
he
[music] green green
Green mountains, clouds
surrounding the Han River, all
high and majestic, the wind whispering of
birds, the charm of
Vietnam, the birth of Christ, lying there, the ocean whispering, our father
's sorrowful spring.  Building the
Vietnamese flag with the silent, hidden foundation of the people of
Dinh Nam Tha V in the city of wisdom,
from Ha Nam, Vietnam, the people of the South, in the city of wisdom, out of the country, from Ha Nam, Vietnam, the people of the South, in
the city of the South, the people of Ha Nam, the people of the South ...
is Vietnam
Vietnam
from H is Vietnam from H is Vietnam
H
[music]
H yellow chrysanthemum, gentleman from oil, even pigs
won't fall, yellow chrysanthemum, Thanh
Cao, wealthy, even if withered, it's not the
color, the club is also yellow, the club of a hundred
practitioners, wealthy, difficult, not
discouraged, the wealthy, difficult, will
overcome, yellow chrysanthemum club,
joyful club, practicing Buddhist Dharma, seeking harmony,
yellow chrysanthemum club, joyful club, practicing Buddhist Dharma, Six Harmonies,
one body, Eastern flower, Two mouths, Flower of Non-Confrontation,
Three thoughts, Eastern flower, B realm, flower, practice, five, Jian, Hua Tong, Jie, Li,
flower,
together, wherever there is Six Harmonies, there is joy, wherever there is Six
Harmonies, there is
liberation, yellow chrysanthemum club,
joyful club, practicing Buddhist Dharma, Six Harmonies,
yellow chrysanthemum club, joyful club, together doing
part, golden club,
An Vui club, together cultivating,
developing Bodhi Mind, protecting the Three Jewels, spreading
Buddhist Dharma widely throughout the world
[music]
world, yellow chrysanthemum, gentleman, the color of
liberation, yellow chrysanthemum club, practicing,
praying  Liberation, helping everyone,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, Peaceful Heart Club,
Liberation Club, Golden Offering Club,
Peaceful Club, Golden Offering Club, Peaceful Club,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club are
Buddhist practitioners at Ba V Temple,
always together practicing to pray for the Supreme Buddha, always together practicing to pray for the Supreme
Buddha.
[Music]
[Applause]
Golden chrysanthemum, even if it withers, it will
not fall, the flower is still golden, Pure and noble,
even if it withers, it is not a matter of the
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the club of practitioners,
rich and poor, not discouraged,
rich and poor,
will overcome. Golden Chrysanthemum Club, Peaceful Club, practicing
Buddhist Dharma, seeking harmony,
Golden Offering Club, Peaceful Club, practicing Buddhist Dharma, seeking harmony,
one, Eastern Flower Pillar, two, Flower Without Struggle, three, meaning, Eastern Flower, four,
realms, Eastern Flower, five, flower, understanding, six, benefits,
Eastern Flower, where there
is Six Harmonies, there is peace, where there is joy, where there
is liberation.
[Music]
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, Peaceful Club, practicing Buddhist
Dharma, Six Harmonies, Golden Chrysanthemum Club,
Peaceful Club  Let's have fun together, the
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the joyful club, let's
cultivate the Bodhi Mind, protect the Three Jewels, spread the
Buddha's teachings widely throughout the world.
[Music] The
golden chrysanthemum, the gentleman's flower, the color of
liberation. The Golden Chrysanthemum Club,
practicing to seek liberation, helping everyone. The
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the joyful club, cultivating the mind to seek
liberation. The
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the joyful
club, the Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the An Vuong
Club, are
Buddhist practitioners at Ba
V Temple, always together, cultivating virtue to seek the supreme enlightenment.
[Music]
[Applause] The golden chrysanthemum,
even if it withers, will
not fall, the flower remains golden. The noble, even if it withers, will not lose its
color. The Golden Chrysanthemum Club, the hundred-cultivation club,
rich and
poor, will not be discouraged. Rich and
poor, will overcome. The
flower. The Golden
Chrysanthemum Club, the joyful club, practicing the Six Harmonies of Buddhism.
One body, the Eastern flower. Two mouths, the flower of non-contention. Three minds, the flower of
mutual joy.  Four realms of
Eastern flowers, cultivating the Eastern flower, the Six
Blessings of Eastern flowers,
wherever there is Six Harmonies, there is peace and joy, wherever there is cultivation of
Six Harmonies, there is
liberation, Golden Chrysanthemum Club,
Peaceful Club, cultivating the Buddha's Dharma, Six Harmonies,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, peaceful club, working together,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, peaceful club, cultivating faith,
developing Bodhi Mind, protecting the Three Jewels, spreading
Buddhist teachings throughout the world
[music]
Golden chrysanthemum, noble flower, color of
liberation, Golden Chrysanthemum Club, cultivating the mind, seeking
liberation, helping everyone,
Golden Offering Club, peaceful club, cultivating the mind, seeking
liberation, Golden Chrysanthemum Club, peaceful club,
Golden Offering Club,
peaceful club, Golden Chrysanthemum Club, people who are
part of the group, cultivating at Ba
V Duong Temple together, the Essence, seeking the supreme path,
always together, believing in
me, so that I may be
without compassion
[music]
K